FEP.UP Pedagogical Council
Pedagogical guidelines for the use of Generative Artificial Intelligence
The widespread use of Generative Artificial Intelligence (AI) tools, provided by
Large Language Models (LLMs), is causing significant changes in knowledge-
building processes in higher education.
Generative AI (GenAI) has the transformative potential to improve teaching and
learning processes and methodologies.
However, the use of Generative AI also carries risks, including plagiarism,
infringement of intellectual property rights, and data privacy violations. Furthermore,
it raises critical questions about the mission of higher education institutions, the role
of teachers, and desirable changes in assessment methods.
It is crucial to prevent the misuse, abuse, and unethical use of Generative AI and
to ensure that it is applied to improve the performance of students and teachers.
The European Union and other international organisations (OECD, UNESCO) have
already published guidelines and regulations for the responsible use of
Generative AI in higher education.
These guidelines from FEP’s Pedagogical Council aim to present the main
guidelines for the ethical, conscious, and responsible use of Generative AI tools in
the completion of assignments, reports, and dissertations. These guidelines
seek to clarify the conditions under which Generative AI can be used and how it
should be disclosed.
GUIDELINES for the responsible, critical, and ethical use of Generative AI in
academic research activities
1. Key principles
The key principles underlying the guidelines for the responsible use of
Generative AI in academic research activities are:
• Reliability in ensuring research quality, reflected in the design, methodology,
analysis, and use of resources. This includes aspects related to the verification
and reproduction of information generated by AI for research. It also involves
being aware of potential issues related to equality and discrimination, including
bias and inaccuracies.
• Honesty in the development, execution, review, presentation, and
communication of research in a transparent, fair, complete, and impartial
manner. This principle includes disclosing that Generative AI has been used and
to what extent.
• Respect for intellectual property rights and the privacy of confidential data
collected from third parties in the research process. The responsible use of
Generative AI must consider the limitations of the technology and the risks
associated with the misappropriation of confidential data and its use for training
by platforms that manage large language models (LLMs). This includes proper
management of information, respect for data privacy and confidentiality,
intellectual property rights, and proper citation.
• Responsibility for research from idea to publication, for its management and
organisation. This includes responsibility for all results produced by the
researcher.
2. Guidelines for researchers
2.1 The Researcher remains ultimately responsible for the academic-scientific
result
• Researchers are responsible for the integrity of content generated by or with the
support of AI tools.
• Researchers maintain a critical approach when using results produced by
Generative AI and are aware of the limitations of the tools, such as biases,
hallucinations, and inaccuracies.
• AI systems are not authors or co-authors. Authorship implies creativity and
responsibility, and therefore belongs to human researchers.
• Researchers do not use material fabricated by Generative AI in the scientific
process, for example, by falsifying, altering, or manipulating original research data.
2.2. The Researcher uses Generative AI transparently
• To be transparent, researchers detail which Generative AI tools are
substantially used in their research processes. The reference to the tool may
include its name, version, date, and details on how it was used, as well as its impact
on the research process. If relevant, researchers make the inputs (prompts) and
results available, in accordance with open science principles.
• Researchers take into account the random and probabilistic nature of
Generative AI tools, which tend to produce different results from the same input.
Researchers seek reproducibility and robustness in their results and conclusions.
They disclose or discuss the limitations of the Generative AI tools used, including
potential biases in the generated content, as well as potential mitigation
measures.
2.3. The Researcher pays special attention to issues related to privacy,
confidentiality, and intellectual property rights when sharing confidential or
protected information with AI tools.
• Researchers remain aware that the information generated or uploaded (text,
data, prompts, images, etc.) may be used for other purposes, such as training AI
models.
Therefore, they protect unpublished or sensitive work (such as their own or that of
third parties) by taking care not to upload it to an online AI system unless there are
guarantees that the data will not be reused, for example, to train future language
models or for untraceable and unverifiable data reuse.
• Researchers take care not to provide third-party personal data to online
Generative AI systems unless the data subject (individual, company, public
institution, etc.) has given their consent and researchers must have a clear
purpose for which the personal data is to be used to ensure compliance with the
European Union's data protection rules set out in the General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR).
• Researchers understand the technical and ethical implications regarding privacy,
confidentiality, and intellectual property rights. They check, for example, the
privacy options of the tools, who manages the tool (public or private institutions,
companies, etc.), where the tool is being run, and the implications for any
information uploaded. This can range from closed environments, hosting on a
third-party infrastructure with guaranteed privacy, to open platforms accessible via
the Internet.
2.4. When using Generative AI, the researcher complies with applicable
national, EU, and international legislation, as in their regular research
activities. In particular, the output produced by Generative AI can be especially
sensitive in relation to the protection of intellectual property rights and personal
data.
• Researchers pay attention to the potential for plagiarism (text, code, images, etc.)
when using Generative AI results. Researchers respect the authorship of others
and cite their work where appropriate. The output of a Generative AI tool (such as a
large language model) may be based on someone else's results and require
acknowledgement and citation.
• The results produced by Generative AI may contain personal data. If this
becomes apparent, researchers are responsible for critically and appropriately
handling any results that contain personal data, and the European Union's data
protection rules (GDPR) must be adhered to.